One of my philosophies for this newsletter is to write about the things that I’m thinking about anyway. But there’s long been a deficiency when it comes to our coverage of AI, which occupies more and more of my headspace even though we only write about it occasionally. Not only am I profoundly interested in increasingly less abstract questions about how AI progress might disrupt society, but I’m also becoming much more of a power user because AI programming tools have reached the point where they’re now quite helpful with programming our various politics and sports models. I’ve spent something like 700 hours working on these models since March, with Claude and ChatGPT serving essentially as my coding assistants.
On a less personal level, we’ve probably passed a long-predicted inflection point where AI is playing a much more prominent role in American politics. And much of the public’s uncertainty about AI has been channeled into a variety of concerns and anxieties around data centers. Google searches for the term “data center” can bounce around some, but so far in 2026, they’re about 3.5x higher than in 2025 and almost 10x higher than in 2024.
The feelings are fairly one-sided. Data centers are overwhelmingly unpopular, with about 70 percent of Americans opposing the construction of data centers in their communities. They were a big story in the Democratic primaries in Michigan and Wisconsin, but even red states like Texas are beginning to have their doubts.
So I thought it was a great time for a chat with Jasmine Sun. Jasmine is based in San Francisco — I first met her when she was a product manager at Substack — but she’s now an independent journalist and newsletter writer who knows the tech industry well by virtue of having worked in it. She recently took a long “field trip” to Wisconsin and Michigan to study opposition to data centers on the ground, speaking with local residents as well as politicians like Abdul El-Sayed. It’s truly excellent, nonpartisan work, and speaks to how out of touch Silicon Valley has become with the rest of the country’s concerns.
The video version of our chat is below. But this is one of those cases where I’d probably recommend reading the (lightly edited) transcript instead. That’s both because we removed a portion where I got knocked off the Internet at some point (maybe our robot overlords weren’t happy about our little chat) and because the conversation gets technical in places and it’s helpful to have links and footnotes that explain some of the terminology. Indeed, one of the challenges Silicon Valley faces is that much can be lost in translation in any and all discussions on AI policy.
Nate Silver: Jasmine, how are you? You just got back from a reporting trip to the Midwest, right?
Jasmine Sun: Yeah. I did about 10 days in Wisconsin and Michigan, then about a week and a half in New York, and now I’m back in SF, where I’m normally based. It’s good to be back in the city.
Nate: I wanted to give a big plug for your newsletter. You were formerly a product manager at Substack, is that right?
Jasmine: I was at Substack for like four years, mostly product stuff.
What the data center backlash looks like on the ground
Nate: I think I saw you at the Manifest conference a couple of years ago — the nerdiest conference out of all the nerdy conferences I’ve ever been to. But the reason I want to plug it is that you’re doing a lot of deep, original, thoughtful reporting and analysis. Substack is great, but it’s often more rewarding for things like “takes”. Obviously we have our election models and things like that. But it doesn’t reward reporting as much, which is an incredibly important and valuable thing. It might result in one post taking several weeks instead of a few hours. What inspired you to take this long journey?
Jasmine: One thing is that I am just not as good as many of the Substackerati at churning out 1,000-word takes on whatever just broke. I’m very impressed by people who can come up with, “here’s my 30 takes from the election that happened last night”. I read that stuff, it’s amazing. But I’m better at taking a bit more time to research, report, and think about things.
I mostly cover AI and Silicon Valley from a cultural and politics angle. A lot of my work is either trying to explain what is going on in Silicon Valley and the AI industry, which is extremely weird, as you know, to the rest of the world. Or in times like this, trying to talk to folks outside of SF about how technology is impacting other places, and bring some of that knowledge back to my friends in Silicon Valley.
Over the past six months, as many people have seen, the data center backlash has picked up, and I think even the broader AI backlash has gotten quite a bit more intense. People remember the booing at college graduations anytime a speaker mentions AI. Or the assassination attempts, like of Sam Altman, that were motivated by more x-risky [existential risk] concerns — a gunman from the Stop AI people showed up at the OpenAI office. There was an Indiana councilman who approved a data center project, and someone shot a gun 13 times at his front door.
So I saw these [data center] moratoriums popping up, and I was just like, wow, people really don’t like AI. They really, really don’t like data centers. I’ve seen the polls, but I didn’t really get why. And most of my friends in SF, especially people I know in the AI industry, were baffled. They were just like, maybe everyone’s watching too many TikToks about water or something. But I felt like I didn’t get it [until] I actually went and spoke to folks who were protesting data centers in their own neighborhoods and in their own communities. So I thought it’d be a good opportunity to take myself — very much a coastal elite who spends all my time in SF and New York — out to the Midwest and talk to a bunch of people who don’t think about AI all day, about AI and data centers.
Nate: I did a lot of reporting trips to Silicon Valley for my book, and California to me feels further and further away. You know what I mean? The entire West Coast [feels further away]. I think this is part of what you talked about with Ezra Klein recently. Part of whatAbundance talks about is some of the failures of governance in California, but maybe more relevantly for our conversation, attitudes toward technology, toward progress, toward growth, and toward AI in particular.
It seemed to me on those reporting trips that the politics of this were going to be complicated. Telling people some combination of “we’re going to take everybody’s white-collar jobs and that’s good” and “there’s a 10 percent chance we’re going to destroy the world because of misaligned AI, but trust us, the upside is really high” — that seemed like it was going to encounter problems when it encountered a wider audience. What did you see on the ground in Wisconsin and Michigan that surprised you, that you wouldn’t have had the vantage point to see in SF?
Jasmine: There’s a bunch of stuff. I do want to talk a little bit about the risk profile stuff too, because I had read excerpts of On the Edge, but I read it in full, front to back, in July or something. Partly because I was thinking about the Silicon Valley values gap and different attitudes toward risk, and I was like, oh, I should actually go and read your whole book. Which was super helpful for thinking about these questions.
But what did I see? There was a bunch of stuff that was surprising, and again, it kind of shows what a bubble I was in. One is that a lot more people were really furious not just at the AI companies, but at their local governments. I kind of thought that everyone would hate AI because of the job stuff, or that they were really suspicious of OpenAI, Meta, whatever. And there was a general negative-ish sentiment toward AI and AI companies. But when I asked activists what riled you up, or why are you frustrated with this data center, it was much more about: we hate how our local council or our mayor kind of bent over and sold out to these tech companies. So it was much more a story of dark money and politics and corruption, and your democratically-elected officials selling you out to some big corporation who shows up with a check and an NDA, more so than anger about the technology.
I actually heard very little about the technology unless I explicitly prompted people — hey, what do you think of ChatGPT, do you use it? Some people were like, yes. Some people were like, no. Most people were like, sometimes it’s not that useful, but it’s fine. That was kind of the median response I got about ChatGPT. As someone who spends a lot of time in the tech world, all we think about is big model scary, but over there it’s much more big corporation scary. And so I found that really surprising.
The backlash isn’t just a “PR problem”
Nate: Traditionally, when you have a new technology, Silicon Valley prides itself on there being disruptive companies that undermine the big hegemons, and that scale proves to be a disadvantage at some point. AI is different. OpenAI was founded by some of the most powerful people and companies in Silicon Valley. Google is Google. Anthropic is very impressive, I would say, given that it’s kind of stayed in the lead lap without that kind of heritage — but at the same time, it started with a lot of seed capital.
Which brings me to the NDAs. Are most projects developed under NDA? How does that play out? You don’t realize it’s being built until the giant building starts going up?
Jasmine: I think that’s definitely how a lot of residents feel. There are NDAs signed in a lot of data center deals. My sense is that they’re actually becoming less common because of the backlash, and a lot of people, even the most pro-build, pro-data center folks I talked to, now regret the NDAs. They think it made things much worse. But a year or two ago, when these deals were being negotiated, NDAs were pretty common.
The process is kind of like the HQ2 process with Amazon. The data center developer would be evaluating a bunch of different potential sites in different cities, and they would present it as an economic development thing. We’re going to contribute so much to your tax base. Who wants it? Who’s going to hand us some subsidies? Who’s going to build out some roads? So they would often engage in a competitive bidding-style process where they’re evaluating multiple towns or cities at once, and during that process the NDAs would prevent towns and cities from talking to each other. Another reason for the NDAs was that sometimes you need to buy out farmland, and as soon as farmers know that it’s a data center showing up and not some other project, they’re like, wow, let me add another zero to that price tag. So I think the NDAs were really a way to create a power asymmetry, frankly, in the negotiations between the data center developers and the people they were negotiating with.
But one thing I learned was that the NDAs have really increased distrust and backlash. I think they’ve made the backlash much worse by the time people do realize, oh, it turns out Project Cannoli or Project Nova is actually a hyperscale data center run by OpenAI. And the other thing city officials would tell me is that the NDAs made it very hard to get ahead of social media. You can sign an NDA, but people are going to start whispering. People are going to hear about farmland buyouts and start wondering what’s going on. People start spreading rumors on Facebook. They say things about water. They say things about the deal. And the city council, if they’ve signed an NDA, can’t do anything to get ahead of that story or correct the record. So I really heard a lot of folks say, yeah, man, I am for the data center, but we should not have signed an NDA. Even Microsoft has said, we’re not doing NDAs anymore as a policy, because of how bad they’ve made it.
Nate: I think Ezra made this point, and maybe I’m jumping ahead. But you sometimes hear the AI labs — and it sounds like you’ve had conversations with senior people at the labs — say, oh, we have a PR issue, a marketing issue. And it’s kind of like, no, I think you have an actual issue. People are rational to wonder, when you have NDAs, is this really benefiting my town or my community? And more broadly, as we’ll get to, their pitch about revolutionizing all of society might be exciting for investors, but that doesn’t go down easily either.
They’ve been caught flat-footed, I think it’s fair to say. Was that inevitable or predictable, or do you blame them for taking so long to catch up?
Jasmine: I kind of do. So often I’m in San Francisco talking to folks I know in the AI industry, and they’ll say things, and in my head I’m just like, do you guys hear yourself? If any normal person walked into this conversation, they would flip out.
One of those examples — I think this came up in the Ezra interview, and it’s come up in your work — is that question of, why would you build something if you think there’s a 10 or 20 percent chance the thing you build kills us all? And I will hear people straight up say, yeah, that’s true, but I think it’s somewhat more likely, maybe there’s a 50 percent chance, that we all live forever and all the diseases are cured. So the expected value of 50 percent we live forever outweighs the 20 percent we all die, and I’m willing to take that chance and roll the dice a few times.
And I’m just like, man, I don’t actually think that most people in this country or in the world would take that bet. But more than that, those folks don’t really have a choice about whether they take that bet, because Silicon Valley is taking the bet and then imposing the costs and risks on other folks.
That was what I really heard with the data center stuff. There’s this sense that maybe people don’t know if AI is a bubble or not. They don’t know if it’s useful to them or not. They’re willing to cop to, yeah, it might have some benefits, it might help the economy in certain ways. But fundamentally there’s often this question of, why is Mark Zuckerberg not putting the data center in his backyard? Why are they putting it in Janesville’s backyard or Mount Pleasant’s backyard? Why are the costs and the risks being externalized while Silicon Valley reaps the benefits up front? I think that was very frustrating to a lot of the people I talked to.
Nate: What downsides are there to a data center being in your local community? A lot of them are quite ugly.
Jasmine: They’re very ugly.
Nate: So there’s the aesthetic aspect. They’re using a lot of power, I suppose.
Jasmine: Yes, lots of power.
Nate: In your reporting, are the environmental impacts probably overstated?
Jasmine: I think they’re kind of overstated. I mean, it depends on the impact. Power and electricity is the most serious one. A lot of data centers are putting so much strain on the grid that you’ve got to build out new power plants to support it, and that’s going to have consequences. A lot of data centers now — though not any of the ones that I visited — are also doing behind-the-meter power provision. They’re not connecting to the grid. These developers are building their own on-site gas plants. In the near future, natural gas is going to be the main thing that powers these data centers, and that’s not super great. People are hoping that eventually data centers will green the grid and use more renewables, but reliability isn’t quite there yet.
I will say the water stuff I think is pretty overblown. It was kind of funny, because in Janesville there’s literally a golf course right next to the proposed data center site. Same thing in Saline — golf course right next to the data center. I tried to do some back-of