In case you missed it, we launched our 2026 election forecast — now named FLIPR — on Tuesday. On balance, the model is bullish on Democrats’ chances in November. But while it currently rates the House as “likely D”, the Senate is still in true tossup territory.
Why is the upper chamber so competitive? Well, it’s pretty simple. True, the GOP has few solid pickup opportunities, but they already have 53 senators and a tie-breaking VP. Democrats need to net at least four seats, mostly from states that Donald Trump carried handily in 2024. If the national popular vote comes in anywhere under D +6, Republicans are the clear favorites to retain the Senate.
But Democrats are on track to beat that number, perhaps by a wide margin. As of today, our forecast for the popular vote is D +7.2. That’s a big enough blue wave to give Democrats a real shot at winning enough competitive seats.
Some of the data can also seem contradictory, however. Just this week, Fox News released polls showing Democrat Sherrod Brown leading by 8 points in Ohio — but Abdul El-Sayed trailing by 4 points in Michigan. In the context of a presidential race, that wouldn’t make much sense, since Michigan is the considerably bluer state. Senate races are different, however. Particularly if you believe that moderation matters, El-Sayed is arguably a weaker candidate than Brown. Brown is also a more familiar face, having served in the Senate from 2007 through 2025.
Outcomes in congressional races are correlated with one another, although considerably less sothan in presidential races. Still, the more advanced versions of FLIPR are a little bit skeptical about taking these polls at face value. It’s not that they’re necessarily wrong about what might happen in an election held today. But El-Sayed has several months to repair the damage from a bruising Democratic primary, while Republicans have time to bring the race more in line with fundamentals in Ohio.
So for my first model talk of the 2026 cycle, I’m bringing back a popular article format from 2024 and taking you on a tour of the seven most likely Senate tipping-point states (plus some honorable mentions at the end). We’ll look at where polls and fundamentals are in tension with one another, like in Michigan, and where they’re more aligned. Combined, these races have a 71 percent chance of deciding which party controls the Senate after 2026.
Full disclosure: we’re cheating just slightly here. In terms of tipping-point probabilities, there’s really a Big 6 rather than a Big 7, with a drop-off after the 6th-most-likely tipping point state, Alaska. Then there’s another tier of roughly half a dozen races, each with around a 4 percent chance of being the tipping point.
For purposes of this article, we’ve promoted North Carolina from that tier into the Big 7. Our model doesn’t think NC is a particularly likely tipping point because it’s pretty confident that Democrat Roy Cooper will win, perhaps comfortably. Still, nobody should take North Carolina too much for granted: it has only voted for Democrats once for president since 1976 (it went for Barack Obama in 2008) and has frequently been a close-but-not-quite state for Democrats in federal races. So it deserves some attention as we explain why FLIPR thinks this might finally be the year for a Democratic breakthrough.
But let’s begin with Democrats’ white whale: Texas.
Texas: Democratic win probability 59%. Tipping point probability 13%
Democrats’ Blexas dream has been around for decades. In 2018, the last midterm with Trump in the White House, they came close when Beto O’Rourke lost to Ted Cruz by just 2.6 points. Of course, Trump carried Texas by nearly 14 points in 2024. And subjectively, it’s still hard for me to wrap my head around a Democrat winning statewide in the Lone Star State. Especially when that Democrat isn’t exactly a Joe Manchin-style Blue Dog.
But that’s why we have a model, and there are important ways in which this year’s race differs from past cycles. In the summer of 2018, O’Rourke trailed Cruz in nearly every poll of the Texas Senate race. But James Talarico currently leads Ken Paxton in our polling average by about 1.9 points. That’s barely a lead, and it’s small enough where even a slight polling error would flip the race in Republicans’ favor. Still, Paxton has led in only one of the seven polls conducted since July.
What about the fundamentals? Texas is a fairly red state, after all. What we call the “simple fundamentals” — meaning the national generic ballot plus Texas’ partisan lean — put it at R +3.4. That’s a far cry from 2024’s R +14, but it shows that an excellent baseline environment alone won’t put Talarico over the top.
Luckily for Talarico, the Texas GOP has done their best to make his job easier. Paxton is a bad candidate, whom Republicans chose to nominate over the seat’s far more electable incumbent, John Cornyn. The model penalizes candidates for scandals. In fact, Paxton has several scandals, but the model’s handling of them is friendly to him in one way: it collapses all scandals, however many there are, into a single line, essentially keeping only the most recent one. However, there’s also Talarico’s dominance in individual campaign contributions: as of mid-July, he’s raised $65 million to Paxton’s $9 million. That moves our “fancy fundamentals” for Texas all the way to D +9.2.
Before we introduced the simple fundamentals concept in 2022, that fancy number is the one our model would have run with. But scandals and other candidate-quality factors almost certainly matter less than they once did. The more partisan the background climate, the more FLIPR takes advantage of the simple fundamentals hedge.
So FLIPR combines these estimates into a more reasonable-looking D +3.1. The combination of 2026 being a very blue year and Paxton being a very bad candidate is just enough to push our blended fundamentals calculation into just about where the polls are. None of this is to say Texas is a lock for Democrats. But the state is just a hairsbreadth away from moving from a toss-up to lean D.
Ohio: Democratic win probability 62%. Tipping point probability 12%
Speaking of “lean D,” Ohio just crossed that threshold based on the Fox News poll. The state is, at least in terms of its baseline environment, similar to Texas. Trump won it by about 11 points in 2024, and our simple fundamentals indicate that it has reverted to R +3 as of today. But things start to diverge when you look at the actual candidates in the race, mainly because there’s no Paxton-style trainwreck involved. Instead, you have Jon Husted — the current Republican incumbent appointed to fill JD Vance’s vacant seat — versus Sherrod Brown, who previously held a Senate seat in Ohio from 2007-2025. Brown did lose statewide just two years ago, but he outperformed Kamala Harris by nearly 8 points.
The model expects Brown to be a good candidate, which pushes the model’s fancy candidate-specific fundamentals estimate up to D +1.6. Importantly too, the model only gives incumbency and the full candidate experience bonus to elected incumbents, whereas Husted was appointed to the office in 2025. Our final fundamentals estimate thus shows an essentially neutral environment in Ohio: R +0.6.
But despite the less-than-ideal environment, Brown leads by 3.2 points in our polling average. He’s been ahead in all but one poll conducted since June, including by 8 points in that recent Fox poll.
Iowa: Democratic win probability 44%. Tipping point probability 11%
Iowa is a small step down in tipping point probability, although 12 percent versus 11 percent isn’t hugely meaningful. But unlike the previous two states, the Democratic candidate is not leading in the polls. It’s essentially a dead heat: Republican and current US House member Ashley Hinson leads state legislator and gold-medal Paralympian Josh Turek by ju